And we're testing.
Today is Wednesday, March 4. And I have the great
pleasure and honor of being in Houston in the
office of Mayo Thompson, class of 41, chatting
with him about his memories of what it was like to be
a student at Texas A&M. Important opening
question. Why did you attend Texas A&M? Well, the
reasons were more than two or three. First of all,
it was at the time in the only school that I thought
that I had a reasonable chance to attend because it
was at the time a poor boy's school. In the four
years that I was at A&M, starting in September 37, A
room board and laundry never cost more than $30 a
month. That was maintenance. A matriculation fee
was $25 a semester. And $5.50, as I recall, a
semester for medical and athletic past
privileges. So they furnished you a uniform for
two years, Didn't have to worry about buying a lot
of clothes. And so that was one reason. I had no
money, so if I'm going to go someplace, I've got to
go where the least of charge is. And secondly, it
was the all-male, all-military environment at
A&M at the time appealed to me. I was active in the
ROTC program in the Fort Worth schools. In junior
high school, the highest rank you could get was
captain. I was in junior high school two years, and
I did that. Then I went to Paschal High School, and I
was the cadet colonel of the Fort Worth ROTC
school, all the high schools in Fort Worth when I
graduated. So it was a natural thing for me, since I
had this military bent to me, to go to A&M. I liked
the idea of the military and of course there was no
interruption. I got out of A&M on the 31st day of May
1941 and didn't go in the army until the next day. So
I was on active duty for five years so I really
literally wore a uniform from the time that I was 13
years old to the time I was 26 years old. Did you
visit the campus before you went to enroll? I'd
never been on the campus, not a single time. I took a
midnight chair car out of Fort Worth, and the
ticket cost $3.30. And my mother had no car, so we
rode down to the train station in a taxi with my
grandmother's old steamer trunk roped on the back
of the trunk of the taxi. And the train left the
station at 11.30. and got into College Station
around 5, 5.30 in the morning and stopped a goodly
number of times. And when I got there at the old
train station, that was the first time that I had
been on that campus. It was right in the heart of the
Depression, of course. And I had with me my high
school transcript, my grandmother's old steamer
trunk with all of my belongings in it, and $100 in
cash that I had borrowed from a local businessman
in Fort Horton. I told my mother the night before, I
said, well, I'll see you in four years. But I had not
the slightest idea it would not be four days. But
when I got there, they took me in and got me a job.
What was your job? Well, the first job I had, I
worked at the YMCA and then had a job in the
Association office. And
it was summer work that made it possible to make a
building of it. Describe the campus physically
when you arrived. What buildings were there? What
did it look like?
Well, of course there was nothing on the west side
of the railroad track. farmland. The dairy was
over there, as I recall. Even the vet school was
over on the east side. And Frances Hall, part of
Cadet Laura then, was heavy. Go out and meet
Frances Hall and tell us when you met her. Looking
for a person, of course, was a little difficult
since it was a building. The campus was austere, if
there was any question about it. There was no
Memorial Student Center. The YMCA was where you
met people if anybody there was to meet. There was
on the campus Aggieland Inn down across from
Sabisa and not too far from the post office down at
Clark Gate. They had a few hotel rooms there, and
they had a dining room. And those families that
could afford it and came, they would more often
than not stay there. There were no hotels around,
at least none that I'm aware of. And they would stay
at A-Land Inn, I must say. My mother was on the
campus one time in four years. She came down for
Mother's Day my senior year. Incidentally, at the
time, we met that day at Kyle Field.
I delivered the Mother's Day address that year.
And I spoke about the coming war in May of 41. And Dr.
T.O. Walton said that he had heard countless
Mother's Day addresses. He said, I've never heard
one where the mothers were told to be prepared for
their sons to go to war.
There wasn't much to it. Highway 6 was a two-lane
road. Freshmen couldn't leave the campus, saved
by permission of their units, commanders, and
even then, and going home on the weekends was
absolutely out of the question until
mid-semester when you got your first grades,
which you posted on your door.
Hazing was was very much
in vogue in those days. Describe those events that
today would be identified as hazing. Well, it
varied between, there were 54 units on the campus.
There were six regiments. And those six regiments
were divided into 54 batteries, troops, or
companies, depending on which of the combatant
branches of the Army that you belonged to. It was
only Army ROTC at the time. It depended. It
depended. Each unit varied to some extent. For
example, a freshman was never touched with a board
in my outfit. Never. And what was your outfit? I was
in G Coast. Did it have a nickname?
Like later, I would hear about Spider D. Did you all
have a... No. Okay. No, not that I recall. There was
a board that was in some use for a long time called
Big G. Looked like a canoe pilot. But go back. You
were about to tell me about the reunion of your
unit. Well, the hazing was the sophomores trained
the freshmen. And they used to wear a room orderly.
Even a sophomore had a room orderly. Seniors had
two. You went to the post office. You got the
upperclassman's mate. You got his laundry
together. You ran details for him. You did
everything for him. A senior could just holler
out, freshman, and every freshman that was not in
class had to come to the room. But that was called
general fish call. Others, juniors and
sophomores, had to call freshmen by name to get
them to come and do something. You duck walked, you
did push-ups. They aired you out at 11 o'clock at
night, made you spend the night in the woods. They
harassed you considerably, cadet lower. You
served the upperclassmen in the mess hall. You
walked in the street. The freshmen were not good
enough to walk on the sidewalk. And in my outfit,
they called sophomores second-year fish. They
didn't think very much of it. You really didn't
begin to enjoy corps life or life at A&M until your
junior year. And then seniors, no matter what
their position in the corps was, whether they were
the corps commander or a second lieutenant, a
senior was a senior was a senior. And considerable
authority vested in them. We had the first court
trip that I went on was when we played Rice in
Houston in September, I mean in the fall of 37. And
after we had our parade here. How did you get down to
Houston? Well, those that could afford it came on a
train and the rest of us hitchhiked because there
were no cars that were allowed. Seniors were
permitted automobiles and maybe 10 or more
seniors in the whole student body, and they
couldn't keep them on campus. So you got a ride. In
any event, we were, after the parade was over, the
sophomores... Wait, where'd y'all gather? Where
was the parade? Well, it was down Main Street here
in Houston, just like it still is to this day. You
gathered and Well, I forget now where the assembly
point was, but we marched from south to north. Oh,
south to north. As my recall, and turned on Texas
Avenue and went up Travis Street, but I don't
remember the exact route of the march. Then Rice
Stadium was at the corner of University and Main,
and they had some little ticket booths out there.
There was one man that could sit inside one of those
booths. And when I got out there and other
freshmen, there was a massive group. And some
sophomore said, don't worry about the ticket.
We're going to push the fence now. We're going to go
in a big cycle on the fence. And we're not going to go
through the gates. We're going to push the fence
now. This was some sophomore's idea of a great way
to go into the ballgame. And so the time was set, now
I don't remember how long before the game was to
start, that we were supposed to push the fence
down. And easily do it, of course. We used to pick up
automobiles in front of the YMCA and move them from
the steps when we were getting ready to have Yelp
practice. Put them behind a tree over there. Had to
have a wrecker service come out and get them out.
Whatever.
About five minutes or so, ten minutes before we
were just pushed the fence down, a senior So I can
see him to this day standing up there. He just had
boots on. And in those days, we had whistles. And
they were all chained, and they had them hooked
under our blouse pockets on the left.
Whistle-bullet. And in those days, instead of
calling corps attention, it was called battalion
attention. That's the way they did it in the mess.
when they wanted everybody to stop eating except
seniors, they would keep eating. Called the
battalion to attention and everything got as
quiet as you can imagine with a senior standing up
there. And he said, all right freshmen, all right
sophomores, line up. We're going through the
gates. And he was held down off the top of the little
ticket booth. And we went through the gates. No
fence pushed down. We went through the gates.
Seniors said,
line up, freshmen, line up. We were going through
the gates. And that was the end of it. It just shows
you the discipline.
There were regular catch-out hitchhiking posts.
And if you got upstream from that, that was a no-no.
And you could drive by there, and if you saw
anybody, that was ahead of the regular catch-out
bar. You just tell them, get your bag, go out to
wherever, and they'd pick up their bags and move. I
only saw that two or three times, but I had a senior
court in those days. As you went from Fort Worth to
College Station and back, normally where did
Where was the hitchhiking spot? Okay, it was over
on Highway 6 near what is now University
Boulevard. Eastgate? Eastgate. Okay. All right,
now where in Fort Worth then? It was a Catholic
school out at the south end of Fort Worth. I think it
was called OLV. I don't remember Our Lady of
Victory, but it was a small girls' Catholic school
with commodious grounds, and that's where one
stayed in. So you hitchhiked for four years. Yeah,
I had no car. And did you or any of your friends ever
have any bad experiences hitchhiking? No. Did you
ever hear of any? No, never. No, you had your bag,
and in those days they had big A&M stickers.
Everybody just had one on their bag, and you'd go
out there. The problem wasn't getting picked up.
The problem was there weren't any cars. There was
no traffic on that two-lane road. between Houston
and Waco. Now, with straight face, I ask you this
question. Well, what did you wear when you were
hitchhiking? You wore the same thing you wore on
that campus, that uniform, of course. Let's see.
Tell me, we were on hazing a while ago. Give me some
other details of freshman life routine. Well,
aside from running details for upperclassmen,
And always you kept your door open after call to
quarters and before tabs you had to have your door
open. It was true of sophomores as well in my
outfit. And a junior was a hall monitor and you had
to be at your desk and look like you're studying or
studying. What were the forbidden dorm room
activities? Well, of course, there wasn't any
hell racing in the dormitories at the top. Could
you smoke in your room? Sure. Okay. Sure. Could you
drink alcoholic beverage in your room? No, that
was, I'm not saying it wasn't done, but it was not
supposed to be done. Okay. Could you? We weren't
supposed to have any on the campus. Could you have a
girl in your room? No. I'm not saying it didn't
happen, but you were not supposed to. All right.
What about some of the pranks, jokes, good bull?
Well, the pranks is airing you out and making you
spend the night in the woods. Another is drowning
you out. In the spring and before the summer would
come, the campus was littered with mattresses
because of the drown-out time. And where a group
would get together and get some buckets and fill
them with water. and you just enter into this room
in the dead of night, and while they're in bed
asleep, you drown them out. All right. Who was
normally the victim of a drownout? Everybody. Oh,
so it wasn't just sophomores? No, no. Now, would
you ever drown out a senior? Yes. Ah. Yes. Was it
normally within your outfit? Normally.
Normally. Can you think of any almost
one-of-a-kind pranks, tricks, jokes? Well,
there was fish day on the 1st of April. In those
days, freshmen had white stripes on their left
sleeve, as I recall, showing that they were
freshmen, because that was the only thing
different between them and a sophomore. The
uniforms were the same. But you take your fish
stripe off on the 1st of April, and you'd go out to
Fish Tank, Fish Lake, I forgot what it was called,
and you'd usually have a can of beer. Where was
that? Well, it was out west of the railroad tracks.
I can't remember exactly now where it was. And you
spent the day out there, and it was pretty rowdy. As
a matter of fact, very much so. But you were then
accepted there. The sophomores quit calling you
fish. You were a month away from being through the
semester or two months, April and May, because we
didn't usually get out until early June in those
days, as you know. As a freshman, how were you
indoctrinated with the routine of being a
freshman and whipping out and all that? How did
that come about? Well, it just was done locally by
the sophomores. In your outfit? In your outfit.
Alright, you came and what did you think your major
was going to be and why? Well, I'd always wanted to
be a lawyer so I took what was then called a pre-law
course. I only had planned to stay at A&M for two
years because one could then go over to Austin to go
to law school. And you get a BBA and an LLB in five
years. So that was my intention. It just so
happened that my sophomore year in my outfit, I won
the best drill medal, which meant that I was likely
to be the first sergeant my junior year, which I
was. So having won that medal, I decided, well, I
think I'll just stay. The fact of the matter is, I
had an opportunity to go to West Point. I got a
letter in between my freshman and sophomore year.
I had made earlier indications to my congressman
of an interest and I got this announcement that a
test was going to be given at a particular place and
I didn't even go. Do you remember what courses you
took as a freshman? Yes, English,
chemistry, from a man to be ultimately the
chancellor of A&M. Yeah, talk about him as a
faculty member, teacher. Well, of course, I guess
he taught in those years everybody ever went to
him. I told him, I found me, I got him at a time when he
was in a generous mood. I made a B in freshman
chemistry.
His teaching style, what was it like? Well, of
course, big classes. We had a big amphitheater.
Must have had 250 in the class. And then you had lab.
So there wasn't anything really close and
personal about it. But was he boring in class? No,
he wasn't. No. The subject was boring to me. I hated
chemistry. I hated it. Remembering balances or
whatever. H2O was an easy one because it had a two
and there was only one and the O had none. But it was
not anything that appealed to me at all. Did he have
a nickname? I don't remember that he had one.
English, chemistry, what else?
Took algebra.
I'm talking about a liberal arts student now. Do
you remember who? Oh, I have no idea. History? The
fact of the matter is, this was my minor. I majored
in economics, a minor in history. And I had a
history course. And I believe an economics course
as well. Then you took BOLTACS, military science
and tactics, which was a one-hour course your
freshman and sophomore year. three hours your
junior and senior year. And it was compulsory for
the first two, as you know. And that consisted of
one hour classroom and then three hours drill
time, one day a week. Plus,
in those days, everybody carried 18 hours.
I visited with my two saw raw students, and one of
them was taking 12 hours, and the other one was
taking 15. And I said, y'all plan on graduating in
five years? And they said, yes. That's the norm
nationally. I understand. And I have a hard time
shaking hands with it. If I told my mother, I said,
I'll see you in five years, she would say, well,
you're going to do that other year. And she had a
third grade education. You went to school, and you
went for four years. Mm-hmm. And I can remember the
engineers and those guys taking 21, 22 hours a
semester. I graduated with a surplus of hours. Not
a surplus of grade points, but a surplus of hours.
Yeah, you all did have grade points. Yeah, we did.
You got three for an A, two for a B, and one for a C, and
nothing for a D. Class attendance. Did you and your
classmates go to class regularly? supposed to,
and the reason for it is that if you had three
allowable cuts for a three-hour course, if you
went beyond that, you got penalized on your grade
point. So you just were self-harmed. Describe for
me, if you can, the routine of a day. What time did
you get up? What happened during? If you got up, if
you were a freshman, of course, you got up before
everybody. And you went outside and had Yale
practice for your outfit. Then you came back in,
you cleaned your own room. Then you cleaned
somebody else's room. And then you got ready to go
to breakfast. And in those days, we marched to
meals. And you lined up to march at about what time?
Oh, I don't remember. The classes started at 8
o'clock. So it was around 7.15, perhaps,
something like that. Who was responsible for
waking the group up in your dorm? The freshmen just
took care of one another. You had nobody else
looking after you. Nobody blew a whistle or
anything? No. No. Right then. All right. So
classes? Eight to 12 and one to five. And most of
your classes? And Saturday, eight to 12. Most of
your classes were held in what, where? Well, where
most of my classes were in the academic building
and in the old chemistry building. Well, I took
biology as well. And that was in an old building. I
can't remember the name of it. Science Hall. Huh?
Science Hall. I'll bet. Well, an old red brick
building, as I remember. Just south of Academic.
Yes. The president's home is made of those bricks
today, turned around. And
let's see. I'll tell you about Haysing. It was done
clandestinely, this board business. I can
remember my junior year, first sergeant in the
outfit. And something had happened, and I don't
know whether the seniors were upset. Seniors
didn't waste their time
using the board on the sophomore. If they used it at
all, it was on the junior. And the juniors on the
sophomore, if something wasn't going right. But I
was sitting out, and we were in Mitchell Hall. We
were in Mitchell. Bazell Goodwin and Hart. The
Coast Artillery Regiment was the third largest
regiment on the campus. So we were all right next to
the Y's. The hospital is there now. They had steep
steps going up, and I was up at the top. And either
Colonel Hill or Colonel Hollinshead came by. They
were the two tactical officers for the Coast
Artillery. Both A&M men.
And you could hear the boards popping. And of
course, when I saw Colonel, I got up and saluted.
And you could hear it. And he said, well,
everything's quiet around here. Good night,
Colonel. Salute. I have my senior year in
preparation for RV weekend.
I had been appointed by a couple of my classmates
when we went across the river in the 14 mile trip and
bought some white hard scotch. And I had it laid out
in a drawer that was part of the storage room, the
clouded storage facility for the room. And
Colonel Hornshead came in on an inspection. And he
pulled out a drawer in there, which is my senior
year. There was a board line in there, and he closed
that, pulled out this next door, and there was
whiskey. He said, well, everything looks neat
around here. On RV initiation, 60 juniors in the
company and 60 seniors. Then there are only 60
seniors, and you don't have 60 juniors. And you get
invited. And the hazing took place in the
horseshoe that Kyle beat. And senior RVs walk
across the campus on a Sunday morning with the
boards in their hand. And you know how that
horseshoe is. A senior here and a senior here. And
you come through and each one of them bangs you
three times. Each junior gets banged six times.
Six times by each of the 60 seniors. Each junior
gets hit six times by these two seniors. then six,
then six, and when you get to the end, you're
bloody. It wasn't near bloody, you were bloody.
You wore one pair of trousers and one pair of
shorts, period, paragraph. And I've seen guys
just step over on the side of the line and vomit, get
up and get back in the line and finish. Well, it was
terribly, terribly punishing. But that was just
the part, the morning session. And the afternoon
went down to the old rodeo, where they had rodeos,
as it calls them, type things. And there they
stripped you down naked. Are you talking about the
pavilion? The pavilion, whatever it's called.
Right there, near Cushing Library. Yeah, that's
correct. It used to have some stables along there,
where they kept some quarter horses. And you'd
bend down and they'd put wintergreen in the back of
your legs, at your knees. And they dipped raw
oysters in asperity and tied string around them.
And you'd lie in there and you'd open your mouth and
they'd take it out and you'd swallow it and they'd
pull it out. And then you ran some races and in the
meantime you were so sore Good
for you. Strangest thing, nice.
No, you've got to flip. You've got to put the lock
on.
Now check and see if you can turn it. No, no, no, no.
Don't put the key in. It was a grievous, grievous
amount of pacing. It was barbaric. Now this is all
in one day? All in one day on a Sunday. In April? In
April. Then you go back to your outfit and you put on
your white uniform. And you go down to Sabisa Hall
for dinner. And you can't sit. I was going to say,
how did you... Well, you just, and you go to class on
Monday and you can't sit. And of course, when they
see you just easing down or And the professors, of
course, know. And
I look back on that. I've told very few people about
it. Of course, Aggies know about it in my day. I
don't know what they do now, if anything. It was
barbaric. It was meant to do whatever, and it did.
But those were the outstanding, to be in the RVs,
was the cream of the Corps of Cadets crop. We like to
think so. We like to think so.